---
title: Notebooks done right 
tags:
- review
- learning
- handbook
- JakeVanderPlas
desc: Properly learning how to using Jupyter notebooks. This will be basically a summary of the Jake VanderPlas book "Python Data Science Handbook".
layout: post
---
In this post I make a very short review, summary, of the first chapter from
Jake VanderPlas book "Python Data Science Handbook". I was able to learn quite
a lot about the IPython and notebooks. There are several operators for
<!-- more -->
accessing documentation, code, and searching for functions. However, I think
the most important part of this chapter is the introduction to magic commands
(which I had no knowledge of). They allow you to do all sorts of things:
running shell commands, pasting code, debugging code, profiling code, even
control the information displayed. Last, but not least, there is some internal
functionalities of the notebook, like the In and Out variables.

### Operators
The **?** operator lets you easily access the documentation of a function,
while **??** presents the source code. However, the latter only works if the
function is implemented in pure Python.

The notebooks also provide a tab-completion feature, which I was not aware of.
It can also be used with wildcards (*) to search when you don't know the
complete name of what you are looking for.

Some operators:
- ?: Shows the function documentation;
- ??: Shows the function source code, when using pure Python;
- *+?: Searches for functions using partial information;
- **%**: Magic command, or **%%** for magic cell;
- **!**: runs shell commands, just like vim or NeoVim.

### Shortcuts
The IPython terminal has some shortcuts, a few are very similar to some I
personally have configured in NeoVim. However, they are conflicting with the
browser shortcuts. 


### Magic Commands
The IPython also has some magic commands that start with a **%**, while **%%**
will create a magic cell.

Some magic commands:
- **%paste**: paste a function from interpreter syntax into IPython syntax;
- **%cpaste**: same as above, but interactive;
- **%run**: to execute external Python scripts;
- **%timeit**: to record the execution time for a single line command. This
  will run the line several times to obtain more accurate results;
- **%history -n i-j**: will print the Input history from $$i$$ to $$j$$;
- **%automagic**: enable using magic commands without the operator;
- **%shell-cmd**: most common shell commands are also available as magic
  commands;
- **%xmode M**: controls the amount of information shown for raised exceptions.
  M can be: Plain, Context, and Verbose.

The **%paste** and **%cpaste** did not work for me, but pasting the copied code
worked just fine without them.

### Input and Output history
The In[X] and Out[X] shown in the terminal are actually two dictionaries
mapping the input/output number to is results. Except for functions that return
None. This can be used to access previous outputs in the shell, while using an
underscore followed by a number (_X) is a shorthand for accessing that output.
Besides, adding a **semicolon** to the end of a command will suppress the
output, not inserting it to the Out variable.

### Errors and Debugging
The IPython Debugger (ipdb) is a version of pdb for the IPython. IN fact, they
have similar commands too. Using **%pdb** will launch the debugger
automatically when an exception is raised.

### Profiling and Timing Code
The **%time** (not to be confused with **%timeit**) is better for timing the
code, as it gives the CPU time, preventing system calls to interfere in the
timing.

Profiling code is a program analysis to measure the complexity of a program,
either in space or time. In IPython, this can be achieved with the **%prun**
line-magic. Or, with the line_profiler extension that gives the information of
each line of a function. Both are for time complexity, for space complexity it
is possible to use the memory_profiler extension that enables the **%memit**
line-magic and the **%mprun** for line-by-line.
